Add Flink 2.3.0 release (#853)
apache/flink-web: docs/content/posts/2026-06-10-release-2.3.0.md

---

> title: "Apache Flink 2.3.0: Enhanced SQL Capabilities, Native S3 Support, Improved Performance, and Enterprise-Grade Application Management"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Apache Flink 2.3.0: Enhanced SQL Capabilities, Native S3 Support, Improved Performance, and Application Management"
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Apache Flink 2.3.0: Enhanced SQL Capabilities, Native S3 Filesystem Support, Improved Performance, and Application Management"
```

date: "2026-06-10T00:00:00.000Z"
aliases:
- /news/2026/06/10/release-2.3.0.html
authors:
- flink:
  name: "Apache Flink PMC"

---

The Apache Flink PMC is pleased to announce the release of Apache Flink 2.3.0.

> This release significantly expands SQL capabilities with changelog conversion operators, enhances materialized table flexibility, introduces an experimental, high-performance native S3 filesystem, and delivers enterprise-grade application management. Flink 2.3.0 brings together contributors from around the globe, implements 15 FLIPs (Flink Improvement Proposals), and resolves numerous issues and enhancements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release significantly expands SQL capabilities with changelog conversion operators, enhances materialized table flexibility, introduces an experimental, high-performance native S3 filesystem, and delivers application management. Flink 2.3.0 brings together contributors from around the globe, implements full or core functionalities of 15 FLIPs (Flink Improvement Proposals), and resolves numerous issues and enhancements.
```

Key improvements in this release include new SQL operators for changelog manipulation (`FROM_CHANGELOG` and `TO_CHANGELOG`), fine-grained control over materialized table refresh strategies, adaptive partition selection for optimized backpressure handling, and a completely redesigned S3 filesystem built on AWS SDK v2. The introduction of application-level lifecycle management provides better visibility and control for production deployments, while enhanced watermark alignment can dramatically improve backlog processing performance. A reworked SinkUpsertMaterializer brings much improved performance for some Flink SQL workloads. 

We extend our heartfelt thanks to all contributors for making this release possible!

Let's dive into the details.

# Flink SQL Improvements

> ## FROM_CHANGELOG and TO_CHANGELOG: Bridging Append-only and Dynamic Changelog Tables (FLIP-564)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## FROM_CHANGELOG and TO_CHANGELOG: Bridging Append-only and Dynamic Changelog Tables
```
It may be unnecessary to put the FLIP ID in the title, since related information is already included in each More Information section. Pls let me know your opinions.

If so, Could you please go through all the titles and remove the FLIP IDs?

> ## FROM_CHANGELOG and TO_CHANGELOG: Bridging Append-only and Dynamic Changelog Tables (FLIP-564)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## FROM_CHANGELOG and TO_CHANGELOG: Bridging Append-only and Dynamic Changelog Tables
```
It may be unnecessary to put the FLIP ID in the title, since related information is already included in each More Information section. Pls let me know your opinions.

If so, Could you please go through all the titles and remove the FLIP IDs?

Author: Done

The `USING` clause of `CREATE FUNCTION` now accepts an `ARTIFACT` keyword as a future-proof alternative to `JAR`. This generic keyword prepares the syntax for future ecosystem assets like Python wheels, while remaining fully backward compatible:

```sql
-- New syntax
CREATE FUNCTION my_func AS 'com.example.MyUdf'
  USING ARTIFACT 's3://bucket/path/my-udf.jar';

-- Existing syntax still works
CREATE FUNCTION my_func AS 'com.example.MyUdf'
  USING JAR 's3://bucket/path/my-udf.jar';
```

**More Information**
* [FLIP-559](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/x/64TMFw)

## Critical Bug Fix: MiniBatch Aggregation Record Loss

Flink 2.3 fixes a critical bug in `MiniBatchGroupAggFunction` that could silently drop records when mini-batch aggregation was enabled and the planner used a `ONE_PHASE` aggregation strategy. The bug occurred when a key's mini-batch contained only retractions with no existing state—the function would incorrectly return early, dropping all remaining keys in the bundle. This has been corrected to ensure all keys are processed.

**More Information**
* [FLINK-35661](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-35661)

# Connectors

## Native S3 FileSystem

> Flink 2.3 introduces a ground-up rewrite of S3 connectivity with `flink-s3-fs-native`, a new plugin built directly on AWS SDK v2. This replaces the Hadoop and Presto-based connectors with a modern implementation that delivers:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Flink 2.3 introduces a ground-up S3 Filesystem with `flink-s3-fs-native`, a new plugin built directly on AWS SDK v2. This replaces the Hadoop and Presto-based connectors with a modern implementation that delivers:
```

Reviewer 2: This plugin is drop in replacement for Hadoop and Presto-based connectors

- **Native AWS integration**: IAM Roles for Service Accounts (IRSA), modern credential providers, and direct SDK v2 integration
- **Non-blocking I/O**: Asynchronous operations for improved throughput
- **Unified implementation**: Single plugin provides both `FileSystem` and `RecoverableWriter` (exactly-once streaming sinks)

> - **Zero Hadoop dependencies**: Cleaner deployment with smaller footprint

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Zero Hadoop dependencies**: No dependency mess with smaller footprint
```

> The plugin registers the standard `s3://` scheme and uses a new `s3.*` configuration namespace:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The plugin registers the standard `s3://` and `s3a://` scheme and uses a new `s3.*` configuration namespace:
```

The plugin registers the standard `s3://` and `s3a://` scheme and uses a new `s3.*` configuration namespace:

```yaml
s3.region: us-west-2
s3.endpoint: https://s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com
s3.path-style-access: false
s3.upload.min.part.size: 5MB
s3.upload.max.concurrent.uploads: 4
s3.async.enabled: true
s3.read.buffer.size: 64KB
s3.bulk-copy.enabled: true
```

Additional configuration supports SSE-KMS encryption, chunked encoding, checksum validation, and entropy injection for high-throughput workloads.

> Note: The Native S3 FileSystem is experimental in Flink 2.3. It is functionally complete and has demonstrated strong performance in benchmarks, but more experience is needed before it can be recommended for use in production.

Author: @Samrat002 Does this sound right to you? Also see my update above, at line 132, about better performance.

Reviewer 2: I think this is partially correct. We can remove the part below

> but more experience is needed before it can be recommended for use in production.

@alpinegizmo WDUT ?

Author: I've reworked this. See what you think.

Reviewer 2: new wording looks good 🚀

* [Native S3 FileSystem Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-2.3/docs/deployment/filesystems/s3/)

# Runtime Improvements

## Adaptive Partition Selection for RPC-Heavy Workloads (FLIP-339)

When upstream and downstream parallelism differ, Flink uses `RebalancePartitioner`, which selects
target channels round-robin. For jobs that interact with external RPC services (Redis, HBase,
LLM serving, etc.) round-robin selection causes severe backpressure as soon as a single
downstream subtask slows down — the partitioner keeps feeding it new data even though it is
already overloaded.

Flink 2.3 adds an adaptive, load-aware partition-selection mode for
`StreamPartitioner` that routes records to the least-loaded downstream channel instead. In

> benchmarks, this delivers up to ~3x throughput improvement under skewed downstream processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Support Adaptive Partition Selection (FLIP-339)

Uneven load across tasks in a Flink job may cause backpressure and latency.
For the `RebalancePartitioner` and `RescalePartitioner` data partitioning modes,
Flink 2.3 introduces an adaptive data partitioning feature based on downstream task load.
It distributes data dynamically according to downstream workloads to balance traffic and improve job throughput.
```

The feature is opt-in via two new options:

- `taskmanager.network.adaptive-partitioner.enabled` (default: `false`)
- `taskmanager.network.adaptive-partitioner.max-traverse-size` (default: `4`) — number of
  channels examined when selecting the idlest target.

**More Information**
* [FLIP-339](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/x/nYyzDw)

## AdaptiveScheduler Rescale History and Web UI (FLIP-487 and FLIP-495)

> Streaming jobs using the adaptive scheduler now record a complete history of rescale events, including parallelism changes, slot allocations, scheduler state transitions, and termination reasons. This data is available through new REST endpoints and visualized in a dedicated "Rescales" tab in the Flink Web UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Streaming jobs using the adaptive scheduler now record a complete history of rescale events,
including parallelism changes, slot allocations, scheduler state transitions,
and termination reasons. This data is available through new REST endpoints and visualized in a dedicated "Rescales" tab in the Flink Web UI.
```

The UI exposes:
- Rescale event counts and timeline
- Duration statistics with percentiles
- Per-event details (parallelism before/after, triggered-by reason)
- Adaptive scheduler configuration

```yaml
# Enable rescale history (disabled by default)
web.adaptive-scheduler.rescale-history.size: 100
```

Setting the history size to a positive integer activates the feature.

**More Information**
* [FLIP-487](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/x/vZCMEw)
* [FLIP-495](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/x/TQr0Ew)

> * [Elastic Scaling Documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-2.3/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Elastic Scaling / Rescale History](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-2.3/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/#rescale-history)
```

limiting how quickly a job could process a backlog. For example with max allowed drift
configured to 30s and watermark alignment updated every ~1s, prior to Flink 2.3 watermark
alignment was de facto capping the backlog processing speed to:

> 30 "event time" seconds per each 1 "real world" second

In Flink 2.3 the watermark alignment was redesigned to solve those announcement delays by the
introduction of a watermark alignment buffer. By default this buffer has a size of 3 and it
delays the application of the watermark alignment algorithm by 3 update intervals. This means
in Flink 2.3+, by default watermark alignment will be pausing sources a couple of seconds later
than it used to, potentially increasing state size of windowed and temporal operators.
However this should be negligible for all practical use cases. Nevertheless, the size of this
buffer can be configured:

```yaml
# Control alignment buffer size (3 by default)
pipeline.watermark-alignment.buffer-size: 3

# Set to 0 to restore Flink 2.2 behavior
pipeline.watermark-alignment.buffer-size: 0
```

**More Information**
* [FLINK-37399](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-37399)

> ## Checkpointing During Recovery (FLIP-547)

Reviewer: Hi, @1996fanrui Could you help take a look if you had the free time ? many thanks

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the ping, it is fine for me. 

It is same with the release note from https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-35761

Flink now supports triggering checkpoints while a job is still recovering from unaligned
checkpoints. Previously, a checkpoint could only be triggered after all restored channel state
had been fully consumed; when the in-flight state was large, this meant no new checkpoint could
complete for hours, and any restart or rescaling during that window forced the job to redo the
entire recovery from the original checkpoint.

With this feature enabled, jobs can checkpoint early during recovery, preserving work across
subsequent restarts and scaling events. Exactly-once semantics are unchanged.

The feature is disabled by default and can be enabled via two new options:

- `execution.checkpointing.unaligned.recover-output-on-downstream.enabled` (default: `false`)
- `execution.checkpointing.unaligned.during-recovery.enabled` (default: `false`, requires the
  option above to be enabled)

Enabling both is recommended for jobs with large unaligned checkpoint state or frequent
rescaling.

**More Information**
* [FLIP-547](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/x/UQrxFg)

> ## Application-Level Lifecycle Management (FLIP-549 and FLIP-560)

Reviewer: Hi, @eemario
 Could you help take a look if you had the free time ? many thanks

Reviewer 4: This part LGTM. Thanks for your effort!
